The World of Divergent: The Path to Allegiant

Veronica Roth





CONTENTS

Explore the World of Beatrice Prior’s Dystopian Chicago

Veronica Roth Talks about Utopian Worlds

The Factions

What’s in a Name?

Choose Your Faction

Faction Manifestos

Abnegation: The Selfless

Amity: The Peaceful

Candor: The Honest

Erudite: The Intelligent

Dauntless: The Brave

First Look! Never-Before-Seen Quotes from Allegiant

Back Ads



About the Author

Books by Veronica Roth

Copyright

About the Publisher





EXPLORE THE WORLD OF BEATRICE PRIOR’S DYSTOPIAN CHICAGO AND THE



PATH TO ALLEGIANT.

“Decades ago, our ancestors realized that it is not political ideology, religious belief, race, or nationalism that is to blame for a warring world. Rather, they determined that it was the fault of human personality—of humankind’s inclination toward evil, in whatever form that is. They divided into factions that sought to eradicate those qualities they believed responsible for the world’s disarray.



“THOSE WHO BLAMED AGGRESSION



FORMED AMITY.



“THOSE WHO BLAMED IGNORANCE BECAME



THE ERUDITE.



“THOSE WHO BLAMED DUPLICITY



CREATED CANDOR.



“THOSE WHO BLAMED SELFISHNESS



MADE ABNEGATION.



“AND THOSE WHO BLAMED COWARDICE WERE



THE DAUNTLESS.



“WORKING TOGETHER, THESE FIVE FACTIONS



HAVE LIVED IN PEACE FOR MANY YEARS.”

—MARCUS EATON, DIVERGENT



UNTIL NOW.



Before Beatrice Prior’s Choosing Ceremony, before she discovers the unrest and growing conflict that threatens to unravel her seemingly perfect society, how did this society come to be?





VERONICA ROTH



TALKS ABOUT UTOPIAN WORLDS



If utopian fiction became the new trend, instead of dystopian fiction, I wouldn’t read it.

If you actually succeed in creating a utopia, you’ve created a world without conflict, in which everything is perfect. And if there’s no conflict, there are no stories worth telling—or reading! It would be all “Jenny thought she might not be able to attain her lifelong dream of marshmallow taste tester for a little while . . . but she did!” and “John’s dad said he couldn’t go to the movies, so John asked really nicely and his dad changed his mind.” I’m bored already.

But if I were going to create a utopia, I would make a world in which people are focused on their personal, moral obligations, and strive to be the best possible version of themselves. They would be allowed to choose whatever path they wanted in life. They would know what was expected of them, they would have a clear purpose, and they would have a strong sense of group identity and belonging. And there would be five factions. . . .

Oh, wait. I tried that already.

But seriously: DIVERGENT was my utopian world. I mean, that wasn’t the plan. I never even set out to write dystopian fiction, that’s just what I had when I was finished— at the beginning, I was just writing about a place I found interesting, and a character with a compelling story, and as I began to build the world, I realized that it was my utopia. And then I realized that my utopia was a terrible place, and no one should ever put me in charge of creating a perfect society.

Maybe it’s a little depressing to think that my vision of a perfect world is actually so messed up, but I think it means that I don’t really understand what “perfect” is. To me it’s all about virtue and responsibility; to someone else it would be about happiness and peace, and happy drugs would be pumped into the water supply—but that sounds like a nightmare, doesn’t it? Because both of us are wrong about perfect. We have no idea what it would look like, and our approximations of it are incomplete.

And that gives me a lot of hope, because if I don’t know what perfect means, it’s not something I can reach on my own. Which means that I can stop trying to be perfect and just try to love the people around me and the things I’m doing. And strangely enough, that’s Tris’s journey. She tries selflessness on for size, and then she tries bravery, but at the end, it’s what she does out of love that’s more important than any virtue.

I think maybe utopian fiction would actually look just like dystopian fiction, depending on who you are. To the heartbroken person, a world that eradicates love might be a utopia; to the rest of us, it isn’t. To the person who doesn’t have a plan, a world in which everything is planned out for you might be a utopia; to those of us who like to choose our own adventure, it’s definitely not.

So maybe I’ve changed my mind—maybe I would read utopian fiction. Or maybe I already am. What a scary thought.





THE FACTIONS

I have been asked in the past if I made up the words for the faction names. I didn’t, but I did intentionally choose unfamiliar words, for an assortment of reasons. One of them is that I wanted to slow down comprehension of what each faction stands for, so you learn as much by observing as by the name of the faction itself. Another is that the definitions of the more obscure words are more specific, in interesting ways. And a third is—since I’m being honest here—that they sound cooler.

People have also commented that the faction names are different parts of speech—three nouns (Candor, Amity, Abnegation) and two adjectives (Dauntless, Erudite). (For the record, I love this kind of grammar consciousness.) I am aware of that, and it was something I thought about in revisions. The reason for the discrepancy is that each faction chose their own names independently, just as they wrote their own manifestos independently, and formed their own customs and rules independently (to a certain extent, anyway). Keeping that in mind, I tried to pick the words that made the most sense for each faction without considering the other factions too much.



Abnegation: 1. to refuse or deny oneself (some rights, conveniences, etc.); reject; renounce. 2. to relinquish; give up



VERONICA: I like the verbs in that first definition: “refuse,” “deny,” “reject,” “renounce”—active forms of stripping things from your life. As opposed to “relinquish,” “give up” in the second definition—which are more passive.



Amity: 1. friendship; peaceful harmony. 2. mutual understanding and a peaceful relationship, especially between nations; peace; accord. 3. cordiality



VERONICA: It’s not just about banjos and apple-picking. It’s about cultivating strong relationships and trying to understand each other. Oh, Amity.



Candor: 1. the state or quality of being frank, open, and sincere in speech or expression; candidness. 2. freedom from bias; fairness; impartiality.



VERONICA: That definition helped me flesh out Candor more, particularly in the second book, INSURGENT. The faction is not just trying to develop honesty—they’re also trying to develop impartiality.



Dauntless: fearless, undaunted. (Undaunted: courageously resolute, especially in the face of danger or difficulty; not discouraged.)



VERONICA: It’s those two definitions (“fearless” and “undaunted”) that I found so fascinating. Being fearless and being undaunted are two different things. And the characters in DIVERGENT struggle with that distinction.



Erudite: characterized by great knowledge; learned or scholarly



VERONICA: The word “erudite” focuses on knowledge rather than intelligence—intelligence being something you’re born with and can’t necessarily control, and knowledge being something that you acquire. I find that interesting, given what I know about Erudite.





WHAT’S IN A NAME?



Obviously I have a thing about names, or else Beatrice would not have become Tris, and Four would have gone by Tobias in the beginning. I believe the names we choose on our own can be powerful, and they can embody a new identity for us.

When I was young my mother wanted to call me Nikki (a less popular short form of Veronica) and I absolutely refused to respond to it. The same thing happened when people tried to call me Ronnie. I just wasn’t having it. The nickname I chose was V. I think it’s because it sounded less cutesy or girly. What I chose for myself was something that fit with my personality—I’m not exactly cutesy. (Though I am girlier now than I ever used to be—maybe that’s why I don’t go by V as much anymore?)

Name changing is also interesting from a religious perspective. In the Torah, when a biblical figure has an encounter with God, sometimes he or she is given a new name. Abram to Abraham, for example. Jacob to Israel. Sarai to Sarah. Same thing in the Bible—Saul becomes Paul; Simon becomes Peter. This usually signals the beginning of some kind of transformation or indicates that a transformation has already taken place.

If you want a more current example, think Mr. Anderson versus Neo in the Matrix movies, or Augustus versus Gus in The Fault in Our Stars (a little different, but interesting to consider, I think), or Andrew versus Ender in Ender’s Game, or Tom Riddle versus Voldemort in the Harry Potter books and movies, or Anakin versus Darth Vader in Star Wars. (Wow, apparently I really am attracted to this concept, because it’s in all the things I like. . . .)

It’s like we have some kind of need, once we feel that we have changed, for people to call us something different. Is it for us, to suit the way we see ourselves? Or is it for them, to force them to think of us differently? Or a combination of both?

It’s these musings about names that led to the Tobias/Four divide in the first place. Four views Tobias as the name of a helpless little boy, so he chooses Four as the name of his adult self in an attempt to leave the pain behind him. It signifies his strength rather than his weakness. But what he finds is that he can’t ignore his past; it keeps creeping up on him, especially in his fear landscape. So in DIVERGENT, he “gives” Tris his old identity—he trusts her to know his vulnerable side, the side of the child and not the man. She recognizes the significance of this, which is why she starts to call him Tobias. It’s the name he gave to her, the one he trusted her with, and she begins to treasure it for that reason.

In INSURGENT, this name issue becomes a bit more complicated, but for Tris it’s the same. Tobias is the name she chooses for him, because it represents his secret self, the one he showed her and her alone. She calls him Four when she’s with other people, to help him keep his secrets, but in her head, he’s always Tobias.

Now, I like the name Tobias (I seem to be in the minority, but that’s okay!) but I, like most of you, do prefer the name Four, and honestly, I always intended for him to be called Four most of the time. So I tried really, really hard to make some kind of shift in Tris’s mind so it would make sense for her to call him Four in INSURGENT. There are plenty of arguments for why she might do that, and I made all of them, I promise you. But what surprised me was that it never felt right; it didn’t feel like what Tris would really do. So Tobias it is. She’s very stubborn, you know. In INSURGENT, he’s Tobias 95 percent of the time, because that’s how Tris wanted it. You can feel free to keep calling him Four, though—I do!





CHOOSE YOUR FACTION





1. You most want your friends and family to see you as someone who . . .

a. Is willing to make sacrifices and help anyone in need.

b. Is liked by everyone.

c. Is trustworthy.

d. Will protect them no matter what happens.

e. Offers wise advice.



2. When you are faced with a difficult problem, you react by . . .

a. Doing whatever will be the best thing for the greatest number of people.

b. Creating a work of art that expresses your feelings about the situation.

c. Debating the issue with your friends.

d. Facing it head-on. What else would you do?

e. Making a list of pros and cons, and then choosing the option that the evidence best supports.



3. What activity would you most likely find yourself doing on the weekend or on an unexpected day off?

a. Volunteering

b. Painting, dancing, or writing poetry

c. Sharing opinions with your friends

d. Rock-climbing or skydiving!

e. Catching up on your homework or reading for pleasure



4. If you had to select one of the following options as a profession, which would you choose?

a. Humanitarian

b. Farmer

c. Judge

d. Firefighter

e. Scientist



5. When choosing your outfit for the day, you select ...

a. Whatever will attract the least amount of attention.

b. Something comfortable, but interesting to look at.

c. Something that’s simple, but still expresses your personality.

d. Whatever will attract the most attention.

e. Something that will not distract or inhibit you from what you have to do that day.



6. If you discovered that a friend’s significant other was being unfaithful, you would . . .

a. Tell your friend because you feel that it would be unhealthy for him or her to continue in a relationship where such selfish behavior is present.

b. Sit them both down so that you can act as a mediator when they talk it over.

c. Tell your friend as soon as possible. You can’t imagine keeping that knowledge a secret.

d. Confront the cheater! You might also take action by slashing the cheater’s tires or egging his or her house—all in the name of protecting your friend, of course.

e. Keep it to yourself. Statistics prove that your friend will find out eventually.



7. What would you say is your highest priority in life right now?

a. Serving those around you

b. Finding peace and happiness for yourself

c. Seeking truth in all things

d. Developing your strength of character

e. Success in work or school





RESULTS





If you chose mostly As, you are ABNEGATION. You don’t like to draw attention to yourself, and you are more concerned about other people’s contentment than your own. You find joy and fulfillment in making other people happier, safer, and healthier. You believe that the world would be a better place if selfishness were not so widespread. Other people see you as somewhat difficult to get to know, but also as quiet and kind.





If you chose mostly Bs, you are AMITY. You are at peace when the people around you are getting along. You appreciate music and the arts, and it is easy to make you laugh. One of your goals is to find as much happiness as you can. You believe that aggression and hostility are to blame for most of the world’s problems. Others see you as sometimes flaky or indecisive, but also as easygoing and warm.





If you chose mostly Cs, you are CANDOR. You are honest with everyone, no matter how difficult it is, and no matter how much trouble it gets you into. You aren’t easily offended, and would prefer to hear the truth even if it hurts. You believe that if everyone could be honest and forthright with each other, the world would be a much better place. Other people see you as sometimes insensitive, but also as trustworthy and confident.





If you chose mostly Ds, you are dauntless. You love a good adrenaline rush, and you don’t let other people dictate your behavior. You do what you believe is right no matter how difficult or frightening it is. You believe that the world would be better off if people were not afraid to do what was necessary to make things right. Others see you as often abrasive, but also as strong and bold.





If you chose mostly Es, you are erudite. You enjoy learning new things, and you try to understand how everything works. You tend to make decisions based on logic rather than instinct or emotions. You believe the world would be a better place if everyone were well-educated and devoted to learning. Other people see you as sometimes condescending, but also as intelligent and insightful.





FACTION MANIFESTOS





ABNEGATION: THE SELFLESS


FACTION MANIFESTO



I will be my undoing

If I become my obsession.



I will forget the ones I love

If I do not serve them.



I will war with others

If I refuse to see them.



Therefore I choose to turn away

From my reflection,

To rely not on myself

But on my brothers and sisters,

To project always outward

Until I disappear.*



(*Some members add a final line: “And only God remains.” That is at the discretion of each member, and is not compulsory.)





AMITY: THE PEACEFUL

FACTION MANIFESTO



Conversations of Peace



TRUST

A Son says to his Mother: “Mother, today I fought with my friend.”

His Mother says: “Why did you fight with your friend?”

“Because he demanded something of me, and I would not give it to him.”

“Why did you not give it to him?”

“Because it was mine.”

“My son, you now have your possessions, but you do not have your friend. Which would you rather have?”

“My friend.”

“Then give freely, trusting that you will also be given what you need.”



SELF-SUFFICIENCY

A Daughter says to her Father: “Father, today I fought with my friend.”

Her Father says: “Why did you fight with your friend?”

“Because she insulted me, and I was angry.”

“Why were you angry?”

“Because she lied about me.” (In some versions: “Because I was hurt by her words.”)

“My daughter, did your friend’s words change who you are?”

“No.”

“Then do not be angry. The opinions of others cannot damage you.”



FORGIVENESS

A Husband says to his Wife: “Wife, today I fought with my enemy.”

His Wife says: “Why did you fight with your enemy?”

“Because I hate him.”

“My husband, why do you hate him?”

“Because he wronged me.”

“The wrong is past. You must let it rest where it lies.”



KINDNESS

A Wife says to her Husband: “Husband, today I fought with my enemy.”

Her Husband says: “Why did you fight with your enemy?”

“Because I spoke cruel words to her.”

“My wife, why did you speak cruel words to her?”

“Because I believed them to be true.”

“Then you must no longer think cruel thoughts. Cruel thoughts lead to cruel words, and hurt you as much as they hurt their target.”



(The following section was part of the original manifesto, but was later removed.)



INVOLVEMENT

One Friend says to Another: “Friend, today I fought with my enemy.”

The Other Friend says: “Why did you fight with your enemy?”

“Because they were about to hurt you.”

“Friend, why did you defend me?”

“Because I love you.”

“Then I am grateful.”





CANDOR: THE HONEST

FACTION MANIFESTO



DISHONESTY IS RAMPANT. DISHONESTY IS TEMPORARY. DISHONESTY MAKES EVIL POSSIBLE.



As it stands now, lies pervade society, families, and even the internal life of the individual. One group lies to another group, parents lie to children, children lie to parents, friends lie to friends, individuals lie to themselves. Dishonesty has become so integral to the way we relate to one another that we rarely find ourselves in authentic relationships with others. Our dark secrets remain our own. Yet it is our dark secrets that cause conflict. When we are dishonest with the people around us, we begin to hate ourselves for lying; when we are dishonest with ourselves, we can never even attempt to correct the flaws we find within us, the flaws we are so desperate to hide from our loved ones, the flaws that make us lie.

What has become clear is that lies are just a temporary solution to a permanent problem. Lying to spare a person’s feelings, even when the truth would help them to improve, damages them in the long run. Lying to protect yourself lasts for so long before the truth emerges. Like a wild animal, the truth is too powerful to remain caged. These are examples we can clearly see in our own lives, yet we fail to understand that they do not just apply to the dynamic between ourselves and our neighbors, or ourselves and our friends.

What is society but a web of individual-to-individual relationships? And what is conflict except one person’s dark secret crashing into another person’s dark secret? Dishonesty is a veil that shields one person from another. Dishonesty allows evil to persist, hidden from the eyes of those who would fight it.



DISHONESTY LEADS TO SUSPICION. SUSPICION LEADS TO CONFLICT. HONESTY LEADS TO PEACE.



We have a vision of an honest world. In this world, parents do not lie to their children, and children do not lie to their parents; friends do not lie to one another; spouses do not lie to each other. When we are asked our opinions we are free to give them without having to consider any other responses. When we engage in conversation with others, we do not have to evaluate their intentions, because they are transparent. We have no suspicion, and no one suspects us.

And most of all—yes, above all else—we are free to expose our dark secrets because we know the dark secrets of our neighbors, our friends, our spouses, our children, our parents, and our enemies. We know that while we are flawed in a unique way, we are not unique because we are flawed. Therefore we can be authentic. We have no suspicions. And we are at peace with those around us.



TRUTH MAKES US TRANSPARENT. TRUTH MAKES US STRONG. TRUTH MAKES US INEXTRICABLE.



We will raise our children to tell the truth. We will do this by encouraging them to speak their minds at every moment. For the child, withholding words is the same as lying.

We will be honest with our children even at the expense of their feelings. The only reason people cannot bear honesty now is because they were not raised hearing the truth about themselves, and they can’t stand to. If children are raised to hear both honest praise and honest criticism, they will not be so fragile as to crumble beneath the scrutiny of their peers. A life of truth makes us strong.

Adulthood will be defined as a time at which each member of society is capable of bearing every other member’s dark secrets, just as every other member will bear theirs. Therefore each member will be subjected to The Full Unveiling, in which every hidden part of their life is laid bare before their fellow members. They, too, will see the hidden parts of their fellow members’ lives. In this way we bear one another’s secrets. In this way we become inextricable:



TRUTH MAKES US INEXTRICABLE.





ERUDITE: THE INTELLIGENT

FACTION MANIFESTO



WE SUBMIT THE FOLLOWING STATEMENTS AS TRUTH:



1. “Ignorance” is defined not as stupidity but as lack of knowledge.

2. Lack of knowledge inevitably leads to lack of understanding.

3. Lack of understanding leads to a disconnect among people with differences.

4. Disconnection among people with differences leads to conflict.

5. Knowledge is the only logical solution to the problem of conflict.



Therefore, we propose that in order to eliminate conflict, we must eliminate the disconnect among those with differences by correcting the lack of understanding that arises from ignorance with knowledge. The areas in which people must be educated are:



SOCIOLOGY

So that the individual understands how society at large functions.



PSYCHOLOGY

So that the individual understands how a person functions within that society.



MATHEMATICS

So that the individual is prepared for further study in science, engineering, medicine, and technology.



SCIENCE

So that the individual better understands how the world operates.

So that the individual’s study in other areas is supplemented.

So that as many individuals as possible are prepared to enter the fields devoted to innovation and progress.



COMMUNICATION

So that the individual knows how to speak and write clearly and effectively.



HISTORY

So that the individual understands the mistakes and successes that have led us to this point.

So that the individual learns to emulate those successes and avoid those mistakes.





Leaders must not be chosen based on charisma, popularity, or ease of communication, all of which are misleading and have little to do with the efficacy of a political leader. An objective standard must be used in order to determine who is best fit to lead. That standard will be an intelligence test, administered to all adults when the present leader reaches fifty-five or begins to decline in brain function in a demonstrable way.



Those who, after rigorous studying, do not meet a minimum intelligence requirement will be exiled from the faction so they can be made useful. This is not an act of elitism but rather one of practicality: Those who are not intelligent enough to engage in the roles assigned to us— roles that require a considerable mental capacity—are better suited to menial work than to faction work. Menial work is required for the survival of society, and is therefore just as important as faction work.



Information must always be made available to all faction members at all times. The withholding of information is punishable by reprimand, imprisonment, and, eventually, exile. Every question that can be answered must be answered or at least engaged. Illogical thought processes must be challenged when they arise. Wrong answers must be corrected. Correct answers must be affirmed. If an answer to a question is unclear, it must be put to debate. All debates require evidence. Any controversial thought or idea must be supplemented by evidence in order to reduce the potential for conflict.



Intelligence must be used for the benefit, and not to the detriment, of society. Those who use intelligence for their own personal gain or to the detriment of others have not properly borne the responsibility of their gift, and are not welcome in our faction.



It bears repeating: Intelligence is a gift, not a right. It must be wielded not as a weapon but as a tool for the betterment of others.





DAUNTLESS: THE BRAVE

FACTION MANIFESTO



WE BELIEVE

that cowardice is to blame for the world’s injustices.

WE BELIEVE

that peace is hard-won, that sometimes it is necessary to fight for peace. But more than that:

WE BELIEVE

that justice is more important than peace.

WE BELIEVE

in freedom from fear, in denying fear the power to influence our decisions.

WE BELIEVE

in ordinary acts of bravery, in the courage that drives one person to stand up for another.

WE BELIEVE

in acknowledging fear and the extent to which it rules us.

WE BELIEVE

in facing that fear no matter what the cost to our comfort, our happiness, or even our sanity.

WE BELIEVE

in shouting for those who can only whisper, in defending those who cannot defend themselves.

WE BELIEVE,

not just in bold words but in bold deeds to match them.

WE BELIEVE

that pain and death are better than cowardice and inaction, because

WE BELIEVE

in action.



WE DO NOT BELIEVE

in living comfortable lives.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

that silence is useful.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

in good manners.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

in limiting the fullness of life.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

in empty heads, empty mouths, or empty hands.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

that learning to master violence encourages unnecessary violence.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

that we should be allowed to stand idly by.

WE DO NOT BELIEVE

that any other virtue is more important than bravery.





Back Ads





About the Author



Photo © Nelson Fitch



VERONICA ROTH is the #1 New York Times bestselling author of Divergent and Insurgent, the first two books in the Divergent series. Now a full-time writer, Ms. Roth and her husband live near Chicago.



You can visit her online at www.veronicarothbooks.com



Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite HarperCollins authors.





Books by Veronica Roth

DIVERGENT

INSURGENT

ALLEGIANT



THE DIVERGENT SERIES



2-BOOK COLLECTION

THE DIVERGENT SERIES



COMPLETE COLLECTION

FREE FOUR





Copyright

Katherine Tegen Books is an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.



The World of Divergent: The Path to Allegiant

Copyright © 2011, 2012, 2013 by Veronica Roth

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.

www.epicreads.com



ISBN 978-0-06-230080-5

EPUB Edition AUGUST 2013 ISBN 9780062300805



Faction symbols © 2010 Veronica Roth. Used by permission.

Cover symbol design by Rhythm & Hues

13 14 15 16 17 CG/BR 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1



FIRST EDITION





About the Publisher

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street

Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia

http://www.harpercollins.com.au

Canada

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canada

http://www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.harpercollins.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.harpercollins.com





